doc/reference/qweb.rst, before:

:banner: banners/qweb.jpg

.. highlight:: xml

.. _reference/qweb:

====
QWeb
====

QWeb is the primary templating_ engine used by Odoo\ [#othertemplates]_. It
is an XML templating engine\ [#genshif]_ and used mostly to generate HTML_
fragments and pages.

Template directives are specified as XML attributes prefixed with ``t-``,
for instance ``t-if`` for :ref:`reference/qweb/conditionals`, with elements
and other attributes being rendered directly.

To avoid element rendering, a placeholder element ``<t>`` is also available,
which executes its directive but doesn't generate any output in and of
itself::

    <t t-if="condition">
        <p>Test</p>
    </t>

will result in::

    <p>Test</p>

if ``condition`` is true, but::

    <div t-if="condition">
        <p>Test</p>
    </div>

will result in::

    <div>
        <p>Test</p>
    </div>

.. _reference/qweb/output:

data output
===========

QWeb has a primary output directive which automatically HTML-escape its
content limiting XSS_ risks when displaying user-provided content: ``esc``.

``esc`` takes an expression, evaluates it and prints the content::

    <p><t t-esc="value"/></p>

rendered with the value ``value`` set to ``42`` yields::

    <p>42</p>

There is one other output directive ``raw`` which behaves the same as
respectively ``esc`` but *does not HTML-escape its output*. It can be useful
to display separately constructed markup (e.g. from functions) or already
sanitized user-provided markup.

.. _reference/qweb/conditionals:

conditionals
============

QWeb has a conditional directive ``if``, which evaluates an expression given
as attribute value::

    <div>
        <t t-if="condition">
            <p>ok</p>
        </t>
    </div>

The element is rendered if the condition is true::

    <div>
        <p>ok</p>
    </div>

but if the condition is false it is removed from the result::

    <div>
    </div>

The conditional rendering applies to the bearer of the directive, which does
not have to be ``<t>``::

    <div>
        <p t-if="condition">ok</p>
    </div>

will give the same results as the previous example.

Extra conditional branching directives ``t-elif`` and ``t-else`` are also
available::

    <div>
        <p t-if="user.birthday == today()">Happy bithday!</p>
        <p t-elif="user.login == 'root'">Welcome master!</p>
        <p t-else="">Welcome!</p>
    </div>


.. _reference/qweb/loops:

loops
=====

QWeb has an iteration directive ``foreach`` which take an expression returning
the collection to iterate on, and a second parameter ``t-as`` providing the
name to use for the "current item" of the iteration::

    <t t-foreach="[1, 2, 3]" t-as="i">
        <p><t t-esc="i"/></p>
    </t>

will be rendered as::

    <p>1</p>
    <p>2</p>
    <p>3</p>

Like conditions, ``foreach`` applies to the element bearing the directive's
attribute, and

::

    <p t-foreach="[1, 2, 3]" t-as="i">
        <t t-esc="i"/>
    </p>

is equivalent to the previous example.

``foreach`` can iterate on an array (the current item will be the current
value), a mapping (the current item will be the current key) or an integer
(equivalent to iterating on an array between 0 inclusive and the provided
integer exclusive).

In addition to the name passed via ``t-as``, ``foreach`` provides a few other
variables for various data points:

.. warning:: ``$as`` will be replaced by the name passed to ``t-as``

:samp:`{$as}_all`
    the object being iterated over
:samp:`{$as}_value`
    the current iteration value, identical to ``$as`` for lists and integers,
    but for mappings it provides the value (where ``$as`` provides the key)
:samp:`{$as}_index`
    the current iteration index (the first item of the iteration has index 0)
:samp:`{$as}_size`
    the size of the collection if it is available
:samp:`{$as}_first`
    whether the current item is the first of the iteration (equivalent to
    :samp:`{$as}_index == 0`)
:samp:`{$as}_last`
    whether the current item is the last of the iteration (equivalent to
    :samp:`{$as}_index + 1 == {$as}_size`), requires the iteratee's size be
    available
:samp:`{$as}_parity`
    either ``"even"`` or ``"odd"``, the parity of the current iteration round
:samp:`{$as}_even`
    a boolean flag indicating that the current iteration round is on an even
    index
:samp:`{$as}_odd`
    a boolean flag indicating that the current iteration round is on an odd
    index


These extra variables provided and all new variables created into the
``foreach`` are only available in the scope of the``foreach``. If the
variable exists outside the context of the ``foreach``, the value is copied
at the end of the foreach into the global context.

::

    <t t-set="existing_variable" t-value="False"/>
    <!-- existing_variable now False -->

    <p t-foreach="[1, 2, 3]" t-as="i">
        <t t-set="existing_variable" t-value="True"/>
        <t t-set="new_variable" t-value="True"/>
        <!-- existing_variable and new_variable now True -->
    </p>

    <!-- existing_variable always True -->
    <!-- new_variable undefined -->

.. _reference/qweb/attributes:

attributes
==========

QWeb can compute attributes on-the-fly and set the result of the computation
on the output node. This is done via the ``t-att`` (attribute) directive which
exists in 3 different forms:

:samp:`t-att-{$name}`
    an attribute called ``$name`` is created, the attribute value is evaluated
    and the result is set as the attribute's value::

        <div t-att-a="42"/>

    will be rendered as::

        <div a="42"></div>
:samp:`t-attf-{$name}`
    same as previous, but the parameter is a :term:`format string`
    instead of just an expression, often useful to mix literal and non-literal
    string (e.g. classes)::

        <t t-foreach="[1, 2, 3]" t-as="item">
            <li t-attf-class="row {{ item_parity }}"><t t-esc="item"/></li>
        </t>

    will be rendered as::

        <li class="row even">1</li>
        <li class="row odd">2</li>
        <li class="row even">3</li>
:samp:`t-att=mapping`
    if the parameter is a mapping, each (key, value) pair generates a new
    attribute and its value::

        <div t-att="{'a': 1, 'b': 2}"/>

    will be rendered as::

        <div a="1" b="2"></div>
:samp:`t-att=pair`
    if the parameter is a pair (tuple or array of 2 element), the first
    item of the pair is the name of the attribute and the second item is the
    value::

        <div t-att="['a', 'b']"/>

    will be rendered as::

        <div a="b"></div>

setting variables
=================

QWeb allows creating variables from within the template, to memoize a
computation (to use it multiple times), give a piece of data a clearer name,
...

This is done via the ``set`` directive, which takes the name of the variable
to create. The value to set can be provided in two ways:

* a ``t-value`` attribute containing an expression, and the result of its
  evaluation will be set::

    <t t-set="foo" t-value="2 + 1"/>
    <t t-esc="foo"/>

  will print ``3``
* if there is no ``t-value`` attribute, the node's body is rendered and set
  as the variable's value::

    <t t-set="foo">
        <li>ok</li>
    </t>
    <t t-esc="foo"/>

  will generate ``&lt;li&gt;ok&lt;/li&gt;`` (the content is escaped as we
  used the ``esc`` directive)

  .. note:: using the result of this operation is a significant use-case for
            the ``raw`` directive.

calling sub-templates
=====================

QWeb templates can be used for top-level rendering, but they can also be used
from within another template (to avoid duplication or give names to parts of
templates) using the ``t-call`` directive::

    <t t-call="other-template"/>

This calls the named template with the execution context of the parent, if
``other_template`` is defined as::

    <p><t t-value="var"/></p>

the call above will be rendered as ``<p/>`` (no content), but::

    <t t-set="var" t-value="1"/>
    <t t-call="other-template"/>

will be rendered as ``<p>1</p>``.

However this has the problem of being visible from outside the ``t-call``.
Alternatively, content set in the body of the ``call`` directive will be
evaluated *before* calling the sub-template, and can alter a local context::

    <t t-call="other-template">
        <t t-set="var" t-value="1"/>
    </t>
    <!-- "var" does not exist here -->

The body of the ``call`` directive can be arbitrarily complex (not just
``set`` directives), and its rendered form will be available within the called
template as a magical ``0`` variable::

    <div>
        This template was called with content:
        <t t-raw="0"/>
    </div>

being called thus::

    <t t-call="other-template">
        <em>content</em>
    </t>

will result in::

    <div>
        This template was called with content:
        <em>content</em>
    </div>

Python
======

Exclusive directives
--------------------

asset bundles
'''''''''''''

.. todo:: have fme write these up because I've no idea how they work

"smart records" fields formatting
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The ``t-field`` directive can only be used when performing field access
(``a.b``) on a "smart" record (result of the ``browse`` method). It is able
to automatically format based on field type, and is integrated in the
website's rich text edition.

``t-options`` can be used to customize fields, the most common option
is ``widget``, other options are field- or widget-dependent.

debugging
---------

``t-debug``
    invokes a debugger using PDB's ``set_trace`` API. The parameter should
    be the name of a module, on which a ``set_trace`` method is called::
    
        <t t-debug="pdb"/>
    
    is equivalent to ``importlib.import_module("pdb").set_trace()``

Helpers
-------

Request-based
'''''''''''''

Most Python-side uses of QWeb are in controllers (and during HTTP requests),
in which case templates stored in the database (as
:ref:`views <reference/views/qweb>`) can be trivially rendered by calling
:meth:`odoo.http.HttpRequest.render`:

.. code-block:: python

    response = http.request.render('my-template', {
        'context_value': 42
    })

This automatically creates a :class:`~odoo.http.Response` object which can
be returned from the controller (or further customized to suit).

View-based
''''''''''

At a deeper level than the previous helper is the ``render`` method on
``ir.ui.view``:

.. py:method:: render(cr, uid, id[, values][, engine='ir.qweb][, context])

    Renders a QWeb view/template by database id or :term:`external id`.
    Templates are automatically loaded from ``ir.ui.view`` records.

    Sets up a number of default values in the rendering context:

    ``request``
        the current :class:`~odoo.http.WebRequest` object, if any
    ``debug``
        whether the current request (if any) is in ``debug`` mode
    :func:`quote_plus <werkzeug.urls.url_quote_plus>`
        url-encoding utility function
    :mod:`json`
        the corresponding standard library module
    :mod:`time`
        the corresponding standard library module
    :mod:`datetime`
        the corresponding standard library module
    `relativedelta <https://labix.org/python-dateutil#head-ba5ffd4df8111d1b83fc194b97ebecf837add454>`_
        see module
    ``keep_query``
        the ``keep_query`` helper function

    :param values: context values to pass to QWeb for rendering
    :param str engine: name of the Odoo model to use for rendering, can be
                       used to expand or customize QWeb locally (by creating
                       a "new" qweb based on ``ir.qweb`` with alterations)

.. _reference/qweb/javascript:

API
---

It is also possible to use the ``ir.qweb`` model directly (and extend it, and
inherit from it):

.. automodule:: odoo.addons.base.ir.ir_qweb
    :members: QWeb, QWebContext, FieldConverter, QwebWidget

Javascript
==========

Exclusive directives
--------------------

defining templates
''''''''''''''''''

The ``t-name`` directive can only be placed at the top-level of a template
file (direct children to the document root)::

    <templates>
        <t t-name="template-name">
            <!-- template code -->
        </t>
    </templates>

It takes no other parameter, but can be used with a ``<t>`` element or any
other. With a ``<t>`` element, the ``<t>`` should have a single child.

The template name is an arbitrary string, although when multiple templates
are related (e.g. called sub-templates) it is customary to use dot-separated
names to indicate hierarchical relationships.

template inheritance
''''''''''''''''''''

Template inheritance is used to alter existing templates in-place, e.g. to
add information to templates created by an other modules.

Template inheritance is performed via the ``t-extend`` directive which takes
the name of the template to alter as parameter.

The alteration is then performed with any number of ``t-jquery``
sub-directives::

    <t t-extend="base.template">
        <t t-jquery="ul" t-operation="append">
            <li>new element</li>
        </t>
    </t>

The ``t-jquery`` directives takes a `CSS selector`_. This selector is used
on the extended template to select *context nodes* to which the specified
``t-operation`` is applied:

``append``
    the node's body is appended at the end of the context node (after the
    context node's last child)
``prepend``
    the node's body is prepended to the context node (inserted before the
    context node's first child)
``before``
    the node's body is inserted right before the context node
``after``
    the node's body is inserted right after the context node
``inner``
    the node's body replaces the context node's children
``replace``
    the node's body is used to replace the context node itself
No operation
    if no ``t-operation`` is specified, the template body is interpreted as
    javascript code and executed with the context node as ``this``

    .. warning:: while much more powerful than other operations, this mode is
                 also much harder to debug and maintain, it is recommended to
                 avoid it

debugging
---------

The javascript QWeb implementation provides a few debugging hooks:

``t-log``
    takes an expression parameter, evaluates the expression during rendering
    and logs its result with ``console.log``::
    
        <t t-set="foo" t-value="42"/>
        <t t-log="foo"/>
        
    will print ``42`` to the console
``t-debug``
    triggers a debugger breakpoint during template rendering::
    
        <t t-if="a_test">
            <t t-debug="">
        </t>

    will stop execution if debugging is active (exact condition depend on the
    browser and its development tools)
``t-js``
    the node's body is javascript code executed during template rendering.
    Takes a ``context`` parameter, which is the name under which the rendering
    context will be available in the ``t-js``'s body::
    
        <t t-set="foo" t-value="42"/>
        <t t-js="ctx">
            console.log("Foo is", ctx.foo);
        </t>

Helpers
-------

.. js:attribute:: core.qweb

    (core is the ``web.core`` module) An instance of :js:class:`QWeb2.Engine` with all module-defined template
    files loaded, and references to standard helper objects ``_``
    (underscore), ``_t`` (translation function) and JSON_.

    :js:func:`core.qweb.render <QWeb2.Engine.render>` can be used to
    easily render basic module templates

API
---

.. js:class:: QWeb2.Engine

    The QWeb "renderer", handles most of QWeb's logic (loading,
    parsing, compiling and rendering templates).

    OpenERP Web instantiates one for the user in the core module, and 
    exports it to ``core.qweb``. It also loads all the template files 
    of the various modules into that QWeb instance.

    A :js:class:`QWeb2.Engine` also serves as a "template namespace".

    .. js:function:: QWeb2.Engine.render(template[, context])

        Renders a previously loaded template to a String, using
        ``context`` (if provided) to find the variables accessed
        during template rendering (e.g. strings to display).

        :param String template: the name of the template to render
        :param Object context: the basic namespace to use for template
                               rendering
        :returns: String

    The engine exposes an other method which may be useful in some
    cases (e.g. if you need a separate template namespace with, in
    OpenERP Web, Kanban views get their own :js:class:`QWeb2.Engine`
    instance so their templates don't collide with more general
    "module" templates):

    .. js:function:: QWeb2.Engine.add_template(templates)

        Loads a template file (a collection of templates) in the QWeb
        instance. The templates can be specified as:

        An XML string
            QWeb will attempt to parse it to an XML document then load
            it.

        A URL
            QWeb will attempt to download the URL content, then load
            the resulting XML string.

        A ``Document`` or ``Node``
            QWeb will traverse the first level of the document (the
            child nodes of the provided root) and load any named
            template or template override.

        :type templates: String | Document | Node

    A :js:class:`QWeb2.Engine` also exposes various attributes for
    behavior customization:

    .. js:attribute:: QWeb2.Engine.prefix

        Prefix used to recognize directives during parsing. A string. By
        default, ``t``.

    .. js:attribute:: QWeb2.Engine.debug

        Boolean flag putting the engine in "debug mode". Normally,
        QWeb intercepts any error raised during template execution. In
        debug mode, it leaves all exceptions go through without
        intercepting them.

    .. js:attribute:: QWeb2.Engine.jQuery

        The jQuery instance used during template inheritance processing.
        Defaults to ``window.jQuery``.

    .. js:attribute:: QWeb2.Engine.preprocess_node

        A ``Function``. If present, called before compiling each DOM
        node to template code. In OpenERP Web, this is used to
        automatically translate text content and some attributes in
        templates. Defaults to ``null``.

.. [#genshif] it is similar in that to Genshi_, although it does not use (and
              has no support for) `XML namespaces`_

.. [#othertemplates] although it uses a few others, either for historical
                     reasons or because they remain better fits for the
                     use case. Odoo 9.0 still depends on Jinja_ and Mako_.

.. _templating:
    http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Template_processor

.. _Jinja: http://jinja.pocoo.org
.. _Mako: http://www.makotemplates.org
.. _Genshi: http://genshi.edgewall.org
.. _XML namespaces: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XML_namespace
.. _HTML: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HTML
.. _XSS: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cross-site_scripting
.. _JSON: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/JSON
.. _CSS selector: http://api.jquery.com/category/selectors/

Commit message:

[FIX] doc: comment not working section
The classes have changed and are no longer loaded making an empty section.
Correctly documenting it is more than just changing the classes

doc/reference/qweb.rst, after:

:banner: banners/qweb.jpg

.. highlight:: xml

.. _reference/qweb:

====
QWeb
====

QWeb is the primary templating_ engine used by Odoo\ [#othertemplates]_. It
is an XML templating engine\ [#genshif]_ and used mostly to generate HTML_
fragments and pages.

Template directives are specified as XML attributes prefixed with ``t-``,
for instance ``t-if`` for :ref:`reference/qweb/conditionals`, with elements
and other attributes being rendered directly.

To avoid element rendering, a placeholder element ``<t>`` is also available,
which executes its directive but doesn't generate any output in and of
itself::

    <t t-if="condition">
        <p>Test</p>
    </t>

will result in::

    <p>Test</p>

if ``condition`` is true, but::

    <div t-if="condition">
        <p>Test</p>
    </div>

will result in::

    <div>
        <p>Test</p>
    </div>

.. _reference/qweb/output:

data output
===========

QWeb has a primary output directive which automatically HTML-escape its
content limiting XSS_ risks when displaying user-provided content: ``esc``.

``esc`` takes an expression, evaluates it and prints the content::

    <p><t t-esc="value"/></p>

rendered with the value ``value`` set to ``42`` yields::

    <p>42</p>

There is one other output directive ``raw`` which behaves the same as
respectively ``esc`` but *does not HTML-escape its output*. It can be useful
to display separately constructed markup (e.g. from functions) or already
sanitized user-provided markup.

.. _reference/qweb/conditionals:

conditionals
============

QWeb has a conditional directive ``if``, which evaluates an expression given
as attribute value::

    <div>
        <t t-if="condition">
            <p>ok</p>
        </t>
    </div>

The element is rendered if the condition is true::

    <div>
        <p>ok</p>
    </div>

but if the condition is false it is removed from the result::

    <div>
    </div>

The conditional rendering applies to the bearer of the directive, which does
not have to be ``<t>``::

    <div>
        <p t-if="condition">ok</p>
    </div>

will give the same results as the previous example.

Extra conditional branching directives ``t-elif`` and ``t-else`` are also
available::

    <div>
        <p t-if="user.birthday == today()">Happy bithday!</p>
        <p t-elif="user.login == 'root'">Welcome master!</p>
        <p t-else="">Welcome!</p>
    </div>


.. _reference/qweb/loops:

loops
=====

QWeb has an iteration directive ``foreach`` which take an expression returning
the collection to iterate on, and a second parameter ``t-as`` providing the
name to use for the "current item" of the iteration::

    <t t-foreach="[1, 2, 3]" t-as="i">
        <p><t t-esc="i"/></p>
    </t>

will be rendered as::

    <p>1</p>
    <p>2</p>
    <p>3</p>

Like conditions, ``foreach`` applies to the element bearing the directive's
attribute, and

::

    <p t-foreach="[1, 2, 3]" t-as="i">
        <t t-esc="i"/>
    </p>

is equivalent to the previous example.

``foreach`` can iterate on an array (the current item will be the current
value), a mapping (the current item will be the current key) or an integer
(equivalent to iterating on an array between 0 inclusive and the provided
integer exclusive).

In addition to the name passed via ``t-as``, ``foreach`` provides a few other
variables for various data points:

.. warning:: ``$as`` will be replaced by the name passed to ``t-as``

:samp:`{$as}_all`
    the object being iterated over
:samp:`{$as}_value`
    the current iteration value, identical to ``$as`` for lists and integers,
    but for mappings it provides the value (where ``$as`` provides the key)
:samp:`{$as}_index`
    the current iteration index (the first item of the iteration has index 0)
:samp:`{$as}_size`
    the size of the collection if it is available
:samp:`{$as}_first`
    whether the current item is the first of the iteration (equivalent to
    :samp:`{$as}_index == 0`)
:samp:`{$as}_last`
    whether the current item is the last of the iteration (equivalent to
    :samp:`{$as}_index + 1 == {$as}_size`), requires the iteratee's size be
    available
:samp:`{$as}_parity`
    either ``"even"`` or ``"odd"``, the parity of the current iteration round
:samp:`{$as}_even`
    a boolean flag indicating that the current iteration round is on an even
    index
:samp:`{$as}_odd`
    a boolean flag indicating that the current iteration round is on an odd
    index


These extra variables provided and all new variables created into the
``foreach`` are only available in the scope of the``foreach``. If the
variable exists outside the context of the ``foreach``, the value is copied
at the end of the foreach into the global context.

::

    <t t-set="existing_variable" t-value="False"/>
    <!-- existing_variable now False -->

    <p t-foreach="[1, 2, 3]" t-as="i">
        <t t-set="existing_variable" t-value="True"/>
        <t t-set="new_variable" t-value="True"/>
        <!-- existing_variable and new_variable now True -->
    </p>

    <!-- existing_variable always True -->
    <!-- new_variable undefined -->

.. _reference/qweb/attributes:

attributes
==========

QWeb can compute attributes on-the-fly and set the result of the computation
on the output node. This is done via the ``t-att`` (attribute) directive which
exists in 3 different forms:

:samp:`t-att-{$name}`
    an attribute called ``$name`` is created, the attribute value is evaluated
    and the result is set as the attribute's value::

        <div t-att-a="42"/>

    will be rendered as::

        <div a="42"></div>
:samp:`t-attf-{$name}`
    same as previous, but the parameter is a :term:`format string`
    instead of just an expression, often useful to mix literal and non-literal
    string (e.g. classes)::

        <t t-foreach="[1, 2, 3]" t-as="item">
            <li t-attf-class="row {{ item_parity }}"><t t-esc="item"/></li>
        </t>

    will be rendered as::

        <li class="row even">1</li>
        <li class="row odd">2</li>
        <li class="row even">3</li>
:samp:`t-att=mapping`
    if the parameter is a mapping, each (key, value) pair generates a new
    attribute and its value::

        <div t-att="{'a': 1, 'b': 2}"/>

    will be rendered as::

        <div a="1" b="2"></div>
:samp:`t-att=pair`
    if the parameter is a pair (tuple or array of 2 element), the first
    item of the pair is the name of the attribute and the second item is the
    value::

        <div t-att="['a', 'b']"/>

    will be rendered as::

        <div a="b"></div>

setting variables
=================

QWeb allows creating variables from within the template, to memoize a
computation (to use it multiple times), give a piece of data a clearer name,
...

This is done via the ``set`` directive, which takes the name of the variable
to create. The value to set can be provided in two ways:

* a ``t-value`` attribute containing an expression, and the result of its
  evaluation will be set::

    <t t-set="foo" t-value="2 + 1"/>
    <t t-esc="foo"/>

  will print ``3``
* if there is no ``t-value`` attribute, the node's body is rendered and set
  as the variable's value::

    <t t-set="foo">
        <li>ok</li>
    </t>
    <t t-esc="foo"/>

  will generate ``&lt;li&gt;ok&lt;/li&gt;`` (the content is escaped as we
  used the ``esc`` directive)

  .. note:: using the result of this operation is a significant use-case for
            the ``raw`` directive.

calling sub-templates
=====================

QWeb templates can be used for top-level rendering, but they can also be used
from within another template (to avoid duplication or give names to parts of
templates) using the ``t-call`` directive::

    <t t-call="other-template"/>

This calls the named template with the execution context of the parent, if
``other_template`` is defined as::

    <p><t t-value="var"/></p>

the call above will be rendered as ``<p/>`` (no content), but::

    <t t-set="var" t-value="1"/>
    <t t-call="other-template"/>

will be rendered as ``<p>1</p>``.

However this has the problem of being visible from outside the ``t-call``.
Alternatively, content set in the body of the ``call`` directive will be
evaluated *before* calling the sub-template, and can alter a local context::

    <t t-call="other-template">
        <t t-set="var" t-value="1"/>
    </t>
    <!-- "var" does not exist here -->

The body of the ``call`` directive can be arbitrarily complex (not just
``set`` directives), and its rendered form will be available within the called
template as a magical ``0`` variable::

    <div>
        This template was called with content:
        <t t-raw="0"/>
    </div>

being called thus::

    <t t-call="other-template">
        <em>content</em>
    </t>

will result in::

    <div>
        This template was called with content:
        <em>content</em>
    </div>

Python
======

Exclusive directives
--------------------

asset bundles
'''''''''''''

.. todo:: have fme write these up because I've no idea how they work

"smart records" fields formatting
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The ``t-field`` directive can only be used when performing field access
(``a.b``) on a "smart" record (result of the ``browse`` method). It is able
to automatically format based on field type, and is integrated in the
website's rich text edition.

``t-options`` can be used to customize fields, the most common option
is ``widget``, other options are field- or widget-dependent.

debugging
---------

``t-debug``
    invokes a debugger using PDB's ``set_trace`` API. The parameter should
    be the name of a module, on which a ``set_trace`` method is called::
    
        <t t-debug="pdb"/>
    
    is equivalent to ``importlib.import_module("pdb").set_trace()``

Helpers
-------

Request-based
'''''''''''''

Most Python-side uses of QWeb are in controllers (and during HTTP requests),
in which case templates stored in the database (as
:ref:`views <reference/views/qweb>`) can be trivially rendered by calling
:meth:`odoo.http.HttpRequest.render`:

.. code-block:: python

    response = http.request.render('my-template', {
        'context_value': 42
    })

This automatically creates a :class:`~odoo.http.Response` object which can
be returned from the controller (or further customized to suit).

View-based
''''''''''

At a deeper level than the previous helper is the ``render`` method on
``ir.ui.view``:

.. py:method:: render(cr, uid, id[, values][, engine='ir.qweb][, context])

    Renders a QWeb view/template by database id or :term:`external id`.
    Templates are automatically loaded from ``ir.ui.view`` records.

    Sets up a number of default values in the rendering context:

    ``request``
        the current :class:`~odoo.http.WebRequest` object, if any
    ``debug``
        whether the current request (if any) is in ``debug`` mode
    :func:`quote_plus <werkzeug.urls.url_quote_plus>`
        url-encoding utility function
    :mod:`json`
        the corresponding standard library module
    :mod:`time`
        the corresponding standard library module
    :mod:`datetime`
        the corresponding standard library module
    `relativedelta <https://labix.org/python-dateutil#head-ba5ffd4df8111d1b83fc194b97ebecf837add454>`_
        see module
    ``keep_query``
        the ``keep_query`` helper function

    :param values: context values to pass to QWeb for rendering
    :param str engine: name of the Odoo model to use for rendering, can be
                       used to expand or customize QWeb locally (by creating
                       a "new" qweb based on ``ir.qweb`` with alterations)

.. _reference/qweb/javascript:

.. todo:: the members below are no longer relevant, section to rewrite

.. API
.. ---

.. It is also possible to use the ``ir.qweb`` model directly (and extend it, and
.. inherit from it):

.. .. automodule:: odoo.addons.base.ir.ir_qweb
..     :members: QWeb, QWebContext, FieldConverter, QwebWidget

Javascript
==========

Exclusive directives
--------------------

defining templates
''''''''''''''''''

The ``t-name`` directive can only be placed at the top-level of a template
file (direct children to the document root)::

    <templates>
        <t t-name="template-name">
            <!-- template code -->
        </t>
    </templates>

It takes no other parameter, but can be used with a ``<t>`` element or any
other. With a ``<t>`` element, the ``<t>`` should have a single child.

The template name is an arbitrary string, although when multiple templates
are related (e.g. called sub-templates) it is customary to use dot-separated
names to indicate hierarchical relationships.

template inheritance
''''''''''''''''''''

Template inheritance is used to alter existing templates in-place, e.g. to
add information to templates created by an other modules.

Template inheritance is performed via the ``t-extend`` directive which takes
the name of the template to alter as parameter.

The alteration is then performed with any number of ``t-jquery``
sub-directives::

    <t t-extend="base.template">
        <t t-jquery="ul" t-operation="append">
            <li>new element</li>
        </t>
    </t>

The ``t-jquery`` directives takes a `CSS selector`_. This selector is used
on the extended template to select *context nodes* to which the specified
``t-operation`` is applied:

``append``
    the node's body is appended at the end of the context node (after the
    context node's last child)
``prepend``
    the node's body is prepended to the context node (inserted before the
    context node's first child)
``before``
    the node's body is inserted right before the context node
``after``
    the node's body is inserted right after the context node
``inner``
    the node's body replaces the context node's children
``replace``
    the node's body is used to replace the context node itself
No operation
    if no ``t-operation`` is specified, the template body is interpreted as
    javascript code and executed with the context node as ``this``

    .. warning:: while much more powerful than other operations, this mode is
                 also much harder to debug and maintain, it is recommended to
                 avoid it

debugging
---------

The javascript QWeb implementation provides a few debugging hooks:

``t-log``
    takes an expression parameter, evaluates the expression during rendering
    and logs its result with ``console.log``::
    
        <t t-set="foo" t-value="42"/>
        <t t-log="foo"/>
        
    will print ``42`` to the console
``t-debug``
    triggers a debugger breakpoint during template rendering::
    
        <t t-if="a_test">
            <t t-debug="">
        </t>

    will stop execution if debugging is active (exact condition depend on the
    browser and its development tools)
``t-js``
    the node's body is javascript code executed during template rendering.
    Takes a ``context`` parameter, which is the name under which the rendering
    context will be available in the ``t-js``'s body::
    
        <t t-set="foo" t-value="42"/>
        <t t-js="ctx">
            console.log("Foo is", ctx.foo);
        </t>

Helpers
-------

.. js:attribute:: core.qweb

    (core is the ``web.core`` module) An instance of :js:class:`QWeb2.Engine` with all module-defined template
    files loaded, and references to standard helper objects ``_``
    (underscore), ``_t`` (translation function) and JSON_.

    :js:func:`core.qweb.render <QWeb2.Engine.render>` can be used to
    easily render basic module templates

API
---

.. js:class:: QWeb2.Engine

    The QWeb "renderer", handles most of QWeb's logic (loading,
    parsing, compiling and rendering templates).

    OpenERP Web instantiates one for the user in the core module, and 
    exports it to ``core.qweb``. It also loads all the template files 
    of the various modules into that QWeb instance.

    A :js:class:`QWeb2.Engine` also serves as a "template namespace".

    .. js:function:: QWeb2.Engine.render(template[, context])

        Renders a previously loaded template to a String, using
        ``context`` (if provided) to find the variables accessed
        during template rendering (e.g. strings to display).

        :param String template: the name of the template to render
        :param Object context: the basic namespace to use for template
                               rendering
        :returns: String

    The engine exposes an other method which may be useful in some
    cases (e.g. if you need a separate template namespace with, in
    OpenERP Web, Kanban views get their own :js:class:`QWeb2.Engine`
    instance so their templates don't collide with more general
    "module" templates):

    .. js:function:: QWeb2.Engine.add_template(templates)

        Loads a template file (a collection of templates) in the QWeb
        instance. The templates can be specified as:

        An XML string
            QWeb will attempt to parse it to an XML document then load
            it.

        A URL
            QWeb will attempt to download the URL content, then load
            the resulting XML string.

        A ``Document`` or ``Node``
            QWeb will traverse the first level of the document (the
            child nodes of the provided root) and load any named
            template or template override.

        :type templates: String | Document | Node

    A :js:class:`QWeb2.Engine` also exposes various attributes for
    behavior customization:

    .. js:attribute:: QWeb2.Engine.prefix

        Prefix used to recognize directives during parsing. A string. By
        default, ``t``.

    .. js:attribute:: QWeb2.Engine.debug

        Boolean flag putting the engine in "debug mode". Normally,
        QWeb intercepts any error raised during template execution. In
        debug mode, it leaves all exceptions go through without
        intercepting them.

    .. js:attribute:: QWeb2.Engine.jQuery

        The jQuery instance used during template inheritance processing.
        Defaults to ``window.jQuery``.

    .. js:attribute:: QWeb2.Engine.preprocess_node

        A ``Function``. If present, called before compiling each DOM
        node to template code. In OpenERP Web, this is used to
        automatically translate text content and some attributes in
        templates. Defaults to ``null``.

.. [#genshif] it is similar in that to Genshi_, although it does not use (and
              has no support for) `XML namespaces`_

.. [#othertemplates] although it uses a few others, either for historical
                     reasons or because they remain better fits for the
                     use case. Odoo 9.0 still depends on Jinja_ and Mako_.

.. _templating:
    http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Template_processor

.. _Jinja: http://jinja.pocoo.org
.. _Mako: http://www.makotemplates.org
.. _Genshi: http://genshi.edgewall.org
.. _XML namespaces: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XML_namespace
.. _HTML: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HTML
.. _XSS: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cross-site_scripting
.. _JSON: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/JSON
.. _CSS selector: http://api.jquery.com/category/selectors/
